>> Occultism, meditation,
channeling, mediumship,
Eastern religions.
The rise in the West
of all these and more
can be traced back to one
woman, the enigmatic Helena
Blavatsky, who we are
celebrating this Women's
History Month.
This is Gaia News.
Madame Helena
Blavatsky is widely
considered the 19th century's
most famous occultist
and a godmother of
the New Age movement.
Her influence on all of
modern spirituality cannot be
overestimated, as she played
a pivotal role in bringing
to the West everything we
think of today as a part
of alternative
spiritual culture.
Born of noble parents in
Russia, she came to the US
in 1873 after
traveling the globe
and studying with great
hidden masters in the East.
Mitch Horowitz, historian
of alternative spirituality
and author of "Occult
America," on Blavatsky.
>> Madame HP Blavatsky was the
co-founder of the Theosophical
Society.
She was a world traveled
Russian noble woman who appeared
in the West in the 1870s.
And her intention was
to uncover what she
called an occult philosophy.
She introduced Mysticism,
Buddhism, Hinduism,
other faiths, ways of looking
at the world to the West.
She was an absolute
revolutionary,
helped instigate the
independence movement in India.
The list of her accomplishments
could go on for many pages.
She was one of the most
extraordinary women
of the 19th century.
>> In 1875, Blavatsky founded
the Theosophical Society,
which marked the official
starting point of the modern
spiritual revival.
>> The principle behind
theosophy is the unfettered
exploration of all religious
and spiritual ideas.
The motto of the
theosophical movement,
as brought by Madame Blavatsky,
is there is no religion higher
than truth.
So the search is a
search that's plural,
that needs to encompass all
religions, methods, systems.
And all should be
equally honored
as repositories of truth.
>> Madame Blavatsky was also
widely known for bringing
occultism to the West.
>> When we use the
word occult today,
we're usually referring to
hidden philosophies and ideas,
spiritual ideas that
predate the Christian world.
And that usage really came
from Madame Blavatsky.
She reintroduced the term
occult, or occultism,
as a universal
philosophy from which all
our modern faiths emerged.
>> As the first Westerner
to take Buddhist vows,
Madame Blavatsky was hugely
influential in helping to turn
Americans and Europeans
toward Eastern religions
and philosophies.
>> Before Madame Blavatsky,
it wasn't commonly understood
among Westerners that the
Eastern world had its own vast
religious traditions and
practices and mythologies
and parables that were every
bit as rich and ancient,
or more so, than those
found in the Western world.
And Madame Blavatsky really
brought that to our attention
as a culture.
>> Just what made Madame
Blavatsky such a force?
>> Her abilities, her courage,
her capacity to get things
done, to upend and
change the world,
there was something greater
than met the eye about Madame
Blavatsky.
And it's one of the reasons why
we still talk about her today
and why she's still the
subject of controversy today.
>> As a dynamic figure, Madame
Blavatsky also generated
a great deal of controversy.
>> You know, there's no escaping
the fact that Madame Blavatsky
was accused of being a kind
of charlatan or a fake medium
or a carnival performer.
And the arguments
and the controversies
about these things raged back
and forth during her lifetime.
She could seem to create this
imaginary mythos about herself.
Other times, she could
treat real world problems
and real world situations with
such pragmatism and ability
and capacity that she
seemed to understand
the workings of human
events and human nature
better than most people
did at that time and today.
She was a mass of
contradictions and she can't
be categorized in any easy way.
>> Despite the controversy,
Madame Blavatsky gained a huge
following among artists,
writers, philosophers,
scientists, and
seekers of all kinds.
Among them was
Mahatma Gandhi, who
met Blavatsky at a
young age and often said
that her influence
on him helped pave
the way for the Indian
independence movement.
>> Madame Blavatsky's influence
on alternative spirituality was
as seismic as George
Washington's influence
on the founding of
the United States.
Both movements
presumably would have
occurred without
either individual,
but we don't know
for sure and we
don't know what they
would have looked like.
If you subtract Madame
Blavatsky from modern history,
we'd probably be living
in a very different
looking world right now.
>> The impact made by Blavatsky
is even more significant when
considering she was a woman
living in the 19th century.
>> It's important to remember
that when Madame Blavatsky
first came to the US
in the early 1870s,
most Americans had never even
seen a woman speak in public
before, much less be
written about in the press,
be an object of fascination,
be the author of books herself.
Even if Madame
Blavatsky had been
a more traditional
religious figure,
she would have been pioneering.
But the fact that she was
awakening the Western world
to esoteric philosophy
and was a woman
made her a trailblazer
in multiple ways.
>> So this Women's
History Month,
we owe a debt of gratitude
to Madame Helena Blavatsky
for paving the way to a deeper
understanding of our world.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.